# Comparative Study of Adaptive Algorithms

## Description

In this project we implement four adaptive optimizers — AdaGrad, AdaGrad-Norm, RMSprop, and Adam — to compare them with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and Quasi-Newton methods (LBFGS) on two tabular datasets using linear models with both convex and non-convex loss functions. It includes custom implementations of AdaGrad-Norm optimizer and non-nonvex loss, and provides scripts for running experiments and visualizing results.

## Project Structure

- **main.ipynb**: Main notebook for running experiments on different optimizers and loss functions, using the A9a (binary classification) and Covtype (multiclass) datasets. Produces Table 1, Fig.1,2,3 in the report. *(which can be provided by request)*
- **adam.ipynb**: Focuses on Adam-type optimizers (Adam, AdamW, Nadam, AMSGrad) and reproduces Fig.4 in the report.
- **model.py**: Defines the logistic regression model (`Model1` for binary, `Model2` for multiclass) and a custom regularized loss (`RLoss`).
- **utility.py**: Contains training loops, optimizer selection, accuracy metrics, and baseline calculation functions.
- **plots/**: Contains output plots generated by the notebooks, visualizing training loss, test accuracy, and the effect of learning rate for different optimizers.
- **adagradnorm.py**: Custom implementation of the AdaGradNorm optimizer.
- **adamw.py**: Custom implementation of the AdamW optimizer.
- **environment.yml**: Conda environment file listing all dependencies.

## Environment

To set up the environment locally, use:
`conda env create -f environment.yml`

## How to Run

1. **Set up the environment**:
   ```bash
   conda env create -f environment.yml
   conda activate adaptive-algorithms
   ```

2. **Launch JupyterLab**:
   ```bash
   jupyter lab
   ```
   Open `main.ipynb` in Jupyter notebook IDE.

3. **Run the notebooks**:
   - Execute all cells in order. The code will automatically download datasets, preprocess them, train models with different optimizers, and generate plots and summary tables.


## Interpreting the Results

- **Plots**: Generated in the `plots/` directory and displayed in the notebooks. They show:
  - Training loss and test accuracy vs. epochs for each optimizer.
  - The effect of learning rate on accuracy.
  - Comparisons between standard and custom regularized losses.
- **Tables**: Summarize final test accuracy and average training time for each optimizer.


*This project was done in collaboration with Pakeeza Ehsan for the course "Convex Optimization" at the University of Basel.*